# 2k Pacing Article by US College coach Mike Caviston

"Fly-and-die is just not a smart way to approach a race. It is usually employed by athletes who are inexperienced, who don’t have a realistic sense of their current abilities, or who allow themselves to be overwhelmed by the excitement of competition. The physiological consequence is to accelerate the accumulation of fatiguing metabolic byproducts of intense muscular contraction (LACT, NH3, K+, etc.), resulting in severe discomfort and the inability to hold the desired pace 

The idea that there are “free” strokes anywhere in a 2K is a common misconception among the rowing community. Anyone with even a rudimentary understanding of physics and thermodynamics should recognize this is impossible. Starting a race with several intense, sub-race-pace strokes will probably utilize the muscles’ ready supply of phosphagens (ATP & phosphocreatine).

Some people figure, what does it matter when I use my phosphagen stores? It’s anaerobic anyway, so I may as well use them at the start of the race to get a good position in the first 500m, rather than use them to sprint at the end. This thinking is incorrect. After a few seconds (when phosphagen stores are depleted) the muscles support intense contractions by rapidly breaking down glycogen into pyruvate. This rapid or “anaerobic” glycolysis results in the release of hydrogen ions (H+) that must be buffered, resulting in the formation of lactate, and the resulting decrease in muscle pH is a contributing factor to fatigue.

So far I’m sure everyone is nodding their head saying, “Uh-huh, I know that, so what?” The “so what” is that the rapidity of glycolysis is accelerated by the feed-forward signals resulting from the overly-intense, sub-race-pace strokes that start the race. In other words, if you plan to race at a 1:40 pace and take off at a 1:27 pace, your muscles don’t know that you intend to slow up in a few strokes. They immediately jump into action and rapidly break down glycogen to liberate as much immediate energy as possible, and the signal doesn’t immediately stop when you settle into your planned race pace.

The result is a much greater initial rise in lactate. Furthermore, phosphagen compounds help buffer decreasing muscle pH, so it is ill-advised to deplete them early. I don’t know about you, but racing for me is tough enough already without dragging the albatross of increased lactate accumulation into the second 500m, so I prefer to start more conservatively.

Now, some coaches will encourage a young/inexperienced athlete to start hard with the hope that they will discover some hidden gear and perform at a level they didn’t think was possible. Unfortunately, a likely result is the athlete will have such an unpleasant experience that they develop a mental block against racing hard, and it may be a long, long time before they reach their true potential. 

The even-split approach to racing makes the most sense from a purely mechanical standpoint. Consider the hypothetical example of covering 2000m with an average pace of 1:36 either by holding a steady 1:36 pace for the entire distance, or covering half with a 1:35 pace and half with a 1:37 pace. Either method would result in a 6:24 2K, but because of the cubic relationship between velocity and power, and the proportionately greater energy cost of the 1:35 pace, more total energy is expended with the uneven pace. If an athlete is truly performing at maximum capacity, the less efficient pacing results in a slower time.

If you actually calculate the energy difference with this hypothetical example, you might be tempted to say the difference is pretty trivial, but I say even a fraction of a second is significant. And the greater the variation in pace during the race, the greater the amount of energy lost. So logically it must be concluded that the most effective race strategy would be to hold an even pace from start to finish.

But I don’t race that way. I prefer to start at a pace slower than my overall goal pace. But it’s also important to recognize that any strokes slower than your true potential represent lost time that can never be made up, no matter how fast you row later in the race. So you can’t take it too easy either, and that presents a real quandary. On the one hand, you risk going too hard and burning out too soon, and on the other you risk getting too far behind your optimal pace. It’s a fine line to tread, but with enough training and racing experience as well as a little common sense, I think anyone can create an effective race strategy. 

I think the optimal pacing strategy for a 2K race is pretty close to: 
800m (40%) @ GP +1; 600m (30%) @ GP; 400m (20%) @ GP – 1; and 200m (10%) @ GP – 2. [GP = Goal Pace, so to row 2K in 6:24, row the first 800m @ 1:37, the next 600m @ 1:36, the next 400m @ 1:35, and the final 200m @ 1:34.]"

## More from Mike Caviston

I don’t believe it is wise to take any strokes significantly faster than the average for the race. If someone’s first 500m is 6% greater in power than the race average, but they back off in the second half of the first 500m so that the second 250m is actually performed at a power output similar to the final average – how incredibly fast and powerful will the opening 250m have to have been? Some heavyweights come out with the first couple strokes down near 1:10 (!!!) and take the first 10-15 strokes at sub-1:20. I don’t suppose the myth of “free strokes” will ever die, unfortunately. I’ve written about this at length, but to summarize: so much energy expended in the first 20 seconds or so rapidly depletes the muscles’ limited supply of creatine phosphate. This limits the ability to kick late in the race, and since the breakdown of CP consumes H+, using CP supplies early – before H+ has appreciably accumulated – wastes an opportunity to check the decline in muscle pH that is a factor in fatigue. (As an aside, many think the CP must be used early or it will be wasted. They cite as evidence the fact that they can’t produce those powerful sub-1:20 strokes at the end of a race. What they neglect is that near the end of the race, the muscles have accumulated the fatiguing metabolic byproducts of 5+ minutes of intense muscular contractions. So yeah, force production won’t be quite what it is when the muscles are fully rested. Furthermore, most people conceive of the various metabolic pathways – CP, LAS, and aerobic – as being compartmentalized. As in, first the CP stores are used, and then the LAS kicks in, then the aerobic pathway. In reality, they’re all activated instantly though the LAS and aerobic system take progressively longer to become fully functional. Once exercise is under way, they all remain active to some degree, even during moderate-intensity activity. So the CP pool will be partially depleted near the end of the race. However, waiting till the end of the race to take the monster strokes – if they are taken at all – is still the most efficient way to deploy CP stores.)

The most serious consequence of those hard 10-15 strokes at the start is they exponentially accelerate the fatigue process. Disproportionately greater production of H+, greater loss of intracellular K+, greater accumulation of NH3 from complete breakdown of ATP – all take their toll. Some feel that it all evens out – a slow start and a fast finish, or a fast start and a slow finish, what’s the difference? I’m trying to impress upon people – there’s a BIG difference.

Unfortunately the available data on rowing doesn’t allow analysis of smaller increments than 500m. But there is a clue in the data I’ve analyzed from speed skating. The skating 5K takes roughly the same amount of time as a rowing 2K, and the skating data includes splits for the first 200m (which takes about 19-20 seconds). The major difference between “winners” and “losers” in skating is the proportional intensity of the first 200m, with the body of the race being similar in speed and intensity for both groups, until the “losers” fade at the end. Those who start faster, finish slower.

In my opinion, the optimal start for a 2K erg race is to take no more than 10 firm strokes just powerful enough to overcome the flywheel’s inertia and get the monitor’s split to race pace but no faster.
